# TitanicKaggle
Apply the tools of machine learning to predict which passengers survived the sinking of the RMS Titanic. Kaggle competition: kaggle.com/c/titanic

Description
-------------
The sinking of the RMS Titanic is one of the most infamous shipwrecks in history.  On April 15, 1912, during her maiden voyage, the Titanic sank after colliding with an iceberg, killing 1502 out of 2224 passengers and crew. This sensational tragedy shocked the international community and led to better safety regulations for ships.

One of the reasons that the shipwreck led to such loss of life was that there were not enough lifeboats for the passengers and crew. Although there was some element of luck involved in surviving the sinking, some groups of people were more likely to survive than others, such as women, children, and the upper-class.

In this challenge, we ask you to complete the analysis of what sorts of people were likely to survive. In particular, we ask you to apply the tools of machine learning to predict which passengers survived the tragedy.

Results
------------
The goal is to determine which attributes impact a passenger’s survival given the training dataset. All analysis was done using R (the complete code is attached at the end of this document). As seen from the basic summary, the 891passengers in the training data had a 38% survival. A Random Forest can provide an initial insight into which variables correlate with survival (using rpart to fit missing age values). It is obvious that Sex by far has the most correlation with survival, followed by Age, Pclass, and Fare. Whereas 74% of female passengers survived, only around 19% of male passengers survived. Age is a continuous variable, but passengers can be categorized into seniors (65 and over), children (under 18), and adults to better see correlation. Children had a significant higher probability of survival at almost 54%, whereas adults had around 37% and seniors around 9%. Since there are only 11 seniors, which is too low a sample size for meaningful predictions, they can be counted in the adult category. Now adults have about 36% chance at survival. Both ticket fare and class are reflective of a passenger’s wealth, thus it may be helpful to categorize passengers’ wealth with a single variable. 1st and 2nd class passengers, at around 63% and 47% survival, were significantly more likely to survive than 3rd class passengers, who have less than ¼ chance of survival. Fares are extremely skewed, with the vast majority of passengers paying less than $50. Dividing customer fares further into deciles should provide more useful information. The 90 percentile has a great chance at survival at over 75%, whereas anybody below the 40 percentile have very low chance of survival, hovering around 10-30%. Fare price appears to be much better indicator of survival than class. For ease of categorization, we’ll call the 90 percentile Upper class, 30 percentile and below Lower, and in between Middle. Another interesting factor provided by the data that can indicate status (wealth, social, marital, professional etc.) are the passengers’ titles. Using feature engineering techniques (based on the tutorial by Trevor Stephens), titles can be extracted from the passengers’ names. Some of the titles appear redundant. Madame and Mademoiselle are the French equivalents of Mrs. and Miss respectively (Ms. is slightly more ambiguous but will be combined with Miss in this case). Captain, Don, Major, and Sir are all titles reserved for nobility and can be combined, likewise with Dona, Lady, Countess and Jonkheer. The survival rates support previous observations. Women have high rates of survival. Among men, nobility are much more likely to survive (interestingly, this is not the case for women). Younger passengers, such as Master, which refers to young unmarried men, are more likely to survive. None of the Reverends, always in service to others, survived.

The three factors deemed important (wealth/age/sex) can now be aggregated to see their cumulative influence on survival. Upper class female passengers have by far the best odds at survival, whereas lower class male passengers have the lowest. Children in general have higher chance at survival, but middle and especially lower class male children still have very low survival rates.
